Heavy metal contamination in riverine ecosystems have become topical issues in recent years due to agrarian and mining practice, reckless disposal of effluents from municipal and associated industries (Okogwu et al., 2019). Due to rapid industrial and agronomical advancement worldwide, including Bhutan, numerous organic and inorganic contaminants are discharged into river ecosystem that poses adverse effects to both biological system and human life (Rajeshkumar, 2018) (s tashi paper). In addition, land mining, metropolitan sewage and metal smelting discharge excessive amounts of heavy metals into water bodies that seriously affects the water quality (Wang & Fang, 2016). Then, the heavy metals in rivers are accumulated by planktons, aggregated in macro invertebrates, crustacean and fishes, and lastly asserts risk to human through consumption (Amoozadeh, 2014). The topic transfer of heavy metals  progressively aggravates through process of bio-magnification, that has important implication to human health (Ali & Khan, 2019).  
Fishes are nutritionally dense food that contains high protein, low saturated fats, high essential fatty acids (omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids) and vitamins (Ackman, 1989). Fish as dietary component are therapeutically linked to numerous health benefits (Engeset et al., 2015; Newton & McManus, 2011; Mori et al., 1999), thus fish quality and their safety are crucial concern to human health (Murtala et al., 2012). The heavy metal contamination in aquatic foodstuffs, specially fish are of great interest as they can accumulate higher heavy metals through passive adsorption, ingestion of lower organism and toxic suspended particles (Kamaruzzaman et al., 2011). Some of the heavy metals such as Cu, Fe, Co and Zn are essential to fish growth and metabolism, which becomes toxic when its concentration level exceeds toxicity threshold (Canli & Atli, 2003). Whereas non-essential metals, such as Pb, Cd, As and Hg are not only toxic to aquatic organisms, but also pose health risk to human even at low concentration (Anandkumar et al., 2018). 
Generally, heavy metal accumulation in the fishes depends upon sex, age, size, feeding behaviour, and geographical location  (Bawuro et al., 2018). Further, different heavy metals are accumulated in various concentration by different fish species, possibly due to habitat differences and swimming behavior (Yi & Zhang, 2012). Heavy metals are also known to possess varying affinity to different fish tissues, generally following the order: gut content> liver >gills > and muscle tissues (Mukherjee et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2017). Consequently, among different pathways of heavy metal accumulation, dietary ingestion appears to be the major pathway (Ahmed et al., 2019). This is particularly problematic for carnivore fish species, since they consumes already polluted planktons and macroinvertebrates, which are top-notched heavy metal absorber (Erasmus et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2016). The consumption of contaminated fish could cause diseases such as food poisoning, cardiovascular dieases, liver damage and sometimes even fatalities (Hosseini et al., 2015). Hence, assessing fish heavy metal status and associated human health risk is essential to provide factual information to public and regulatory authorities to take necessary steps. 
The Wang Chhu river flowing through Thimphu, the capital city of Bhutan, was previously reported to be deteriorating in water quality due to deforestation, infrastructure development, sewage discharge, and road construction (Giri & Om, 2013). Among many sources of pollution, vehicle washing in Olarong Chhu (Wang Chhu tributary) was previously associated with increased accumulation of heavy metals in stream sediments (Rai et al., 2018). Macroinvertebrates are considered excellent bioindicators of heavy metal contamination but fishes are routinely assessed due to their direct implication to human health (Wang, et al., 2019). The pioneering research on heavy metal contamination in some fish species of Punatsang Chhu river implies similar trend of trace element poisioning in Wang Chhu river (Tashi et al., 2022). Further, extensive investigation regarding degree of heavy metal contamination in aboitic system (water & sediments), biotic accumulation and associated human health hazard has not been documented. Therefore the aim of the research is to generate baseline informtion on heavy metal status in water, sediments, microinvertebrates, fish, and assess the potential human health hazard.
